[FLINK-39261][table] Add FROM_CHANGELOG built-in process table function (#27901)
apache/flink: docs/content/docs/sql/reference/queries/changelog.md

The output contains all input columns except the operation code (e.g., op) column, which is interpreted by Flink's SQL engine and removed. Each output row carries the appropriate change operation (INSERT, UPDATE_BEFORE, UPDATE_AFTER, or DELETE).

```
[all_input_columns_without_op]
```

### Examples

#### Basic usage with standard op names

```sql
-- Input (append-only):
-- +I[id:1, op:'INSERT',        name:'Alice']
-- +I[id:1, op:'UPDATE_BEFORE', name:'Alice']
-- +I[id:1, op:'UPDATE_AFTER',  name:'Alice2']
-- +I[id:2, op:'DELETE',        name:'Bob']

SELECT * FROM FROM_CHANGELOG(
  input => TABLE cdc_stream
)

-- Output (updating table):
-- +I[id:1, name:'Alice']
-- -U[id:1, name:'Alice']
-- +U[id:1, name:'Alice2']
-- -D[id:2, name:'Bob']

-- Table state after all events:
-- | id | name   |
-- |----|--------|
-- | 1  | Alice2 |
```

#### Custom operation column name

```sql
-- Source schema: id INT, operation STRING, name STRING
SELECT * FROM FROM_CHANGELOG(
  input => TABLE cdc_stream,
  op => DESCRIPTOR(operation)
)
-- The operation column named 'operation' is used instead of 'op'
```

#### Table API

```java
// Default: reads 'op' column with standard change operation names

> Table result = cdcStream.fromChangelog();

Reviewer: Add the 'asArguments' examples on how to define the params with table api similar to to_changelog https://github.com/apache/flink/blob/fc27f81ca8f32d0cc043e1c442edd4ab717c09d2/docs/content/docs/sql/reference/queries/changelog.md#L146

Author: Added more docs on table API for fromChangelog similar to toChangelog

| Function | Description |
|:---------|:------------|
| [FROM_CHANGELOG](#from_changelog) | Converts an append-only table with operation codes into a dynamic table |
| [TO_CHANGELOG](#to_changelog) | Converts a dynamic table into an append-only table with explicit operation codes |

## FROM_CHANGELOG

> The `FROM_CHANGELOG` PTF converts an append-only table with an explicit operation code column into a dynamic table (i.e. an updating table). Each input row is expected to have a string column that indicates the change operation. The op column is removed from the output and the row is emitted with the corresponding `RowKind`.

Reviewer: RowKind is an internal concept not thought to be used in docs made for the SQL Persona. We're using "change operation" in the docs for now. Update it in all relevant places so it's consistent

Author: Updated

> This is useful when consuming Change Data Capture (CDC) streams from systems like Debezium, Maxwell, or Canal, where events arrive as flat append-only records with an explicit operation field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is useful when consuming Change Data Capture (CDC) streams from systems like Debezium, Maxwell, or Canal, where events arrive as flat append-only records with an explicit operation field. It's also useful to be used in combination with the TO_CHANGELOG function, when the user wants to turn the append-only table back into an updating table after doing some specific transformation to the events.
```

Author: Addressed

### Syntax

```sql
SELECT * FROM FROM_CHANGELOG(
  input => TABLE source_table PARTITION BY key_col,
  [op => DESCRIPTOR(op_column_name),]

>   [op_mapping => MAP['c, r', 'INSERT', 'u', 'UPDATE_AFTER', 'd', 'DELETE']]

Reviewer: The `invalid_op_handling` param would already be relevant here but we can add it in a follow up PR

Author: Good point and good idea, let's keep this PR not grow too big.

)
```

### Parameters

| Parameter    | Required | Description |
|:-------------|:---------|:------------|
| `input`      | Yes      | The input table. Must be append-only and include `PARTITION BY` for parallel execution. |
| `op`         | No       | A `DESCRIPTOR` with a single column name for the operation code column. Defaults to `op`. The column must exist in the input table and be of type STRING. |
| `op_mapping` | No       | A `MAP<STRING, STRING>` mapping user-defined operation codes to change operation names. Keys are user codes (e.g., `'c'`, `'u'`, `'d'`), values are change operation names (`INSERT`, `UPDATE_AFTER`, `DELETE`). Keys can contain comma-separated codes to map multiple codes to the same operation (e.g., `'c, r'`). When provided, only mapped codes are forwarded - unmapped codes are dropped. Each change operation may appear at most once across all entries. |

#### Default op_mapping

> When `op_mapping` is omitted, the following standard names are used:

Reviewer: We're missing the UPDATE_BEFORE -> UPDATE_BEFORE

We're actually not going to drop UPDATE_BEFORE in the default implementations. We want a simply flat mapping in the default behavior

Author: Added a dynamic way to detect the changelog mode based on the op_mapping:
- no op_mapping (default) -> retract
- op_mapping _not_ containing UPDATE_BEFORE -> upsert
- op_mapping containing UPDATE_BEFORE -> retract

| Input code       | Change operation  |
|:-----------------|:------------------|
| `'INSERT'`       | INSERT            |
| `'UPDATE_AFTER'` | UPDATE_AFTER      |
| `'DELETE'`       | DELETE            |

### Output Schema

The output columns are ordered as:

```
[partition_key_columns, remaining_columns_without_op]
```

> The op column is removed from the output. Output rows carry the appropriate `RowKind` (INSERT, UPDATE_AFTER, or DELETE).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The op column is removed from the output. Output rows carry the appropriate `RowKind` (INSERT, UPDATE_AFTER, UPDATE_BEFORE or DELETE).
```

Author: addressed

### Examples

#### Basic usage with standard op names

```sql
-- Input (append-only):
-- +I[id:1, op:'INSERT',       name:'Alice']
-- +I[id:1, op:'UPDATE_AFTER', name:'Alice2']
-- +I[id:2, op:'DELETE',       name:'Bob']

SELECT * FROM FROM_CHANGELOG(
  input => TABLE cdc_stream PARTITION BY id
)

> -- Output (upsert stream):

Reviewer: I think it'd be good to add the Table output here. Same thing to the to_changelog docs. iN THI SCASE 

Table
id:1 name:'Alice2'

Author: addressed

| Function | Description |
|:---------|:------------|
| [FROM_CHANGELOG](#from_changelog) | Converts an append-only table with operation codes into a dynamic table |
| [TO_CHANGELOG](#to_changelog) | Converts a dynamic table into an append-only table with explicit operation codes |

## FROM_CHANGELOG

The `FROM_CHANGELOG` PTF converts an append-only table with an explicit operation code column into a dynamic table (i.e. an updating table). Each input row is expected to have a string column that indicates the change operation. The op column is removed from the output and the row is emitted with the corresponding change operation.

This is useful when consuming Change Data Capture (CDC) streams from systems like Debezium, Maxwell, or Canal, where events arrive as flat append-only records with an explicit operation field. It's also useful to be used in combination with the TO_CHANGELOG function, when the user wants to turn the append-only table back into an updating table after doing some specific transformation to the events.

### Syntax

```sql
SELECT * FROM FROM_CHANGELOG(

>   input => TABLE source_table PARTITION BY key_col,

Reviewer: We're moving to row semantics as the first default version - no partition by. I'm finishing a new PR that should help you see the changes that you'll have to make

Reviewer: Here is the PR https://github.com/apache/flink/pull/27911

| Function | Description |
|:---------|:------------|

> | [FROM_CHANGELOG](#from_changelog) | Converts an append-only table with operation codes into a dynamic table |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| [FROM_CHANGELOG](#from_changelog) | Converts an append-only table with operation codes into an (potentially updating) dynamic table|
```

Author: Addressed

| [TO_CHANGELOG](#to_changelog) | Converts a dynamic table into an append-only table with explicit operation codes |

## FROM_CHANGELOG

> The `FROM_CHANGELOG` PTF converts an append-only table with an explicit operation code column into a dynamic table (i.e. an updating table). Each input row is expected to have a string column that indicates the change operation. The op column is removed from the output and the row is emitted with the corresponding change operation.

Reviewer 2: also an append-only table is "dynamic"
```suggestion
The `FROM_CHANGELOG` PTF converts an append-only table with an explicit operation code column into a (potentially updating) dynamic table. Each input row is expected to have a string column that indicates the change operation. The operation column is interpreted by the engine and removed from the output.
```

Author: Addressed

> This is useful when consuming Change Data Capture (CDC) streams from systems like Debezium, Maxwell, or Canal, where events arrive as flat append-only records with an explicit operation field. It's also useful to be used in combination with the TO_CHANGELOG function, when the user wants to turn the append-only table back into an updating table after doing some specific transformation to the events.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is useful when consuming Change Data Capture (CDC) streams from systems like Debezium where events arrive as flat append-only records with an explicit operation field. It's also useful to be used in combination with the TO_CHANGELOG function, when converting the append-only table back into an updating table after doing some specific transformation to the events.
```

Author: Addressed

### Syntax

```sql
SELECT * FROM FROM_CHANGELOG(
  input => TABLE source_table [PARTITION BY key_col],
  [op => DESCRIPTOR(op_column_name),]
  [op_mapping => MAP['c, r', 'INSERT', 'u', 'UPDATE_AFTER', 'd', 'DELETE']]
)
```

> `PARTITION BY` is optional when the mapping includes `UPDATE_BEFORE` (retract mode). It is required when the mapping produces upsert mode (no `UPDATE_BEFORE`), because downstream operators need a key for updates and deletes. When provided, records are distributed by the partition key for parallel processing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`PARTITION BY` is optional when the mapping includes `UPDATE_BEFORE` (retract mode). It is required when the mapping produces upsert mode (no `UPDATE_BEFORE`), because downstream operators need a key for updates and deletes. When provided, records are distributed by the partition key for parallel processing.

Note: Please double check whether your CDC data encodes an update using a full image (i.e. capturing the state before and after the update) or partial image (i.e. capturing only the state after the update). FROM_CHANGELOG is very powerful function but might produce incorrect results in subsequent operations and tables, if not configured correctly. 
```

Reviewer 2: Link to a helpful section (maybe above?) that explains the concepts what full and partial image means.

Author: Removed for now, since PARTITION_BY is removed from the FROM_CHANGELOG.

### Parameters

| Parameter    | Required | Description |
|:-------------|:---------|:------------|
| `input`      | Yes      | The input table. Must be append-only. `PARTITION BY` is optional for retract mode (with `UPDATE_BEFORE`) and required for upsert mode (without `UPDATE_BEFORE`). |
| `op`         | No       | A `DESCRIPTOR` with a single column name for the operation code column. Defaults to `op`. The column must exist in the input table and be of type STRING. |

> | `op_mapping` | No       | A `MAP<STRING, STRING>` mapping user-defined operation codes to change operation names. Keys are user codes (e.g., `'c'`, `'u'`, `'d'`), values are change operation names (`INSERT`, `UPDATE_BEFORE`, `UPDATE_AFTER`, `DELETE`). Keys can contain comma-separated codes to map multiple codes to the same operation (e.g., `'c, r'`). When provided, only mapped codes are forwarded - unmapped codes are dropped. Each change operation may appear at most once across all entries. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `op_mapping` | No       | A `MAP<STRING, STRING>` mapping user-defined operation codes to change operation names. Keys are user-defined codes (e.g., `'c'`, `'u'`, `'d'`), values are Flink change operation names (`INSERT`, `UPDATE_BEFORE`, `UPDATE_AFTER`, `DELETE`). Keys can contain comma-separated codes to map multiple codes to the same operation (e.g., `'c, r'`). When provided, only mapped codes are forwarded - unmapped codes are dropped. Each change operation may appear at most once across all entries. |
```

Author: Addressed

#### Default op_mapping

> When `op_mapping` is omitted, the following standard names are used:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When `op_mapping` is omitted, the following standard names are used. They allow a reverse conversion from TO_CHANGELOG by default.
```

Author: Nice point! Addressed

| Input code         | Change operation  |
|:-------------------|:------------------|
| `'INSERT'`         | INSERT            |
| `'UPDATE_BEFORE'`  | UPDATE_BEFORE     |
| `'UPDATE_AFTER'`   | UPDATE_AFTER      |
| `'DELETE'`         | DELETE            |

### Output Schema

The output columns are ordered as:

```
[all_input_columns_without_op]
```

> The op column is removed from the output. Output rows carry the appropriate change operation (INSERT, UPDATE_BEFORE, UPDATE_AFTER, or DELETE).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Flink's SQL engine interprets the appropriate change operation (INSERT, UPDATE_BEFORE, UPDATE_AFTER, or DELETE). The op column is removed from the output. 
```

Author: Reworded

### Examples

#### Basic usage with standard op names

```sql
-- Input (append-only):
-- +I[id:1, op:'INSERT',        name:'Alice']
-- +I[id:1, op:'UPDATE_BEFORE', name:'Alice']
-- +I[id:1, op:'UPDATE_AFTER',  name:'Alice2']
-- +I[id:2, op:'DELETE',        name:'Bob']

SELECT * FROM FROM_CHANGELOG(
  input => TABLE cdc_stream
)

-- Output (updating table):
-- +I[id:1, name:'Alice']
-- -U[id:1, name:'Alice']
-- +U[id:1, name:'Alice2']
-- -D[id:2, name:'Bob']

-- Table state after all events:
-- | id | name   |
-- |----|--------|
-- | 1  | Alice2 |
```

#### Debezium-style CDC codes

```sql
SELECT * FROM FROM_CHANGELOG(
  input => TABLE cdc_stream PARTITION BY id,

>   op => DESCRIPTOR(__op),

Reviewer 2: as far as I know Debezium uses `op` and not `__op`

Author: Removed this section

>   op_mapping => MAP['c, r', 'INSERT', 'u', 'UPDATE_AFTER', 'd', 'DELETE']

Reviewer 2: Debezium also supports full and partial image. We should provide examples for both common use cases. One with update_before, one without. So two Debezium sections make sense.

Author: Since we only support full image I would keep the docs simple

)
-- 'c' (create) and 'r' (read/snapshot) both produce INSERT
-- 'u' produces UPDATE_AFTER
-- 'd' produces DELETE
```

#### Custom operation column name

```sql
SELECT * FROM FROM_CHANGELOG(
  input => TABLE cdc_stream,
  op => DESCRIPTOR(operation)
)

> -- The operation column named 'operation' is used instead of 'op'

Reviewer 2: add an example schema for cdc_stream in this example

Author: Done

```

#### Table API

```java
// Default (retract mode): reads 'op' column with standard change operation names
Table result = cdcStream.fromChangelog();

// Upsert mode requires PARTITION BY — use the generic process() method

> Table result = cdcStream.partitionBy($("id")).process("FROM_CHANGELOG",

Reviewer 2: format this nicer, across multiple lines

Author: Removed `partitionBy`

> Table result = cdcStream.fromChangelog();

Reviewer 2: Add this to the beginning to not confuse people with DataStream API.
```suggestion
Table cdcStream = ...;
```

Author: Added

[partition_key_columns, remaining_columns_without_op]
```

The op column is removed from the output. Output rows carry the appropriate change operation (INSERT, UPDATE_BEFORE, UPDATE_AFTER, or DELETE).

### Examples

#### Basic usage with standard op names

```sql
-- Input (append-only):
-- +I[id:1, op:'INSERT',        name:'Alice']
-- +I[id:1, op:'UPDATE_BEFORE', name:'Alice']
-- +I[id:1, op:'UPDATE_AFTER',  name:'Alice2']
-- +I[id:2, op:'DELETE',        name:'Bob']

SELECT * FROM FROM_CHANGELOG(
  input => TABLE cdc_stream PARTITION BY id
)

-- Output (updating table):
-- +I[id:1, name:'Alice']
-- -U[id:1, name:'Alice']
-- +U[id:1, name:'Alice2']
-- -D[id:2, name:'Bob']

> -- Table state after all events: {id:1, name:'Alice2'}

Reviewer: nit: this looks more like json. Can you use a table format?

Author: Done
